Title: "Wouldn't it be neat if you could write C++ inline in Rust?"
Date: 2017-03-20 7:17
Modified: 2017-03-20 7:17
Category: Programming
Tags: rust, rust-cpp, c++, ffi
Slug: wouldnt-it-be-neat-p1
Authors: Michael Layzell

In June of 2015, I had an idea. At the time, I was obsessed with compilers, and
what was possible to do at compile time. For one of the languages which I was
working on, I got excited by the idea that I could have flawless C++ interop by
embedding all of [clang](https://clang.llvm.org) inside of the compiler, and
have a special `c++ {}` form which would allow you to directly write C++ code
inside the program, and give that code access to the stack variables currently
in scope.

That language never came into fruition, but at the time I was also interested in
another language, which I was going to use to implement my
language, [Rust](https://rust-lang.org). Rust was very interesting to me,
because in 2014 it had been one of the first times I had ever written
"system-level" code. I loved the way it seemed to make everything possible with
apparently no overhead. However, I had run into some problems. I wanted to
use [LLVM](https://llvm.org) to implement the compiler back-end for the language
I was working on, but the best LLVM bindings were written in C++, and using them
from Rust was a tedious experience, to say the least. No good LLVM bindings were
available yet for Rust, so I would pretty much have to write them myself.

I, naturally, started wishing that I had the `c++ {}` block feature in Rust, to
help me write my new programming language. I really enjoy abusing meta
programming features in languages to let me do things which their creators never
intended, so I started concocting ideas as to how I could implement this using
Rust's unstable plugin infrastructure.

Thus, [rust-cpp](https://github.com/mystor/rust-cpp) was born.

You can still find the code for this original version of rust-cpp, although
you'll have trouble getting it to build, archived under
the
[`legacy_rustc_plugin`](https://github.com/mystor/rust-cpp/tree/legacy_macros1.1_v0) branch.

This initial version of rust-cpp was built with 2 parts, and remains possibly
the most powerful version of rust-cpp to this day. Firstly, it contained a
procedural macro, `cpp!`, which would perform the Rust codegen, and store
the information parsed in some global state, and then a lint pass, which would
discover the type information for the callsites, and actually generate and compile
the C++ code.

An example use of this API might look like:

```rust
let a: i32 = 10;
let b: i32 = 20;

let cpp_result = unsafe {
    cpp!((a, b) -> i32 {
        int32_t c = a * 10;
        int32_t d = b * 20;

        return c + d;
    })
};
```

This invocation would "capture" the local variables `a` and `b` in the `cpp!`
closure, exposing those variable names to the C++ code. the closure itself then
would return a `i32`. The C++ code would be contained with a function
invocation, such that the interface looks correct.

The `cpp!` macro expansion would produce some code which would look something
like the following:

```rust
{
    #[link(name = "rust_cpp_tmp", kind = "static")]
    extern "C" {
        fn rust_cpp_936DA01F9ABD4d9d80C702AF85C822A8(a: *const u8, b: *const u8) -> i32;
    }
    rust_cpp_936DA01F9ABD4d9d80C702AF85C822A8(&a as *const _ as *const u8, &b as *const _ as *const u8)
}
```

It would then also record the information parsed from the declaration (the names
of the arguments, the body text extracted from the original span as a string,
etc.) in the global storage.

Then, the lint pass would run. It would walk the typechecked AST, looking at
every function call. If the function call begain with the name `rust_cpp_`, it
would be considered as a `rust-cpp` call. The matching function would be looked
up from global storage.

We would then look at the pre-casting types of `a` and `b`, and try to guess the
C++ type from them. If we failed, we would default to passing an opaque type to
C++.

Once the lint pass had seen every function call which was generated earlier by
the `cpp!` procedural macro, it would write out a `rust_cpp_tmp.cpp` file, which
would then be shelled out to the native c++ compiler. The above function would
have been generated similar to the following:

```c++
/******************************
 * Code Generated by Rust-C++ *
 ******************************/

/* cstdint includes sane type definitions for integer types */
#include <cstdint>

/* the rs:: namespace contains rust-defined types */
namespace rs {
    /* A slice from rust code */
    /* Can be used to interact with, pass around, and return Rust slices */
    template<class T>
    struct Slice {
        const T*  data;
        uintptr_t len;
    };

    /* A string slice is simply a slice of utf-8 encoded characters */
    typedef Slice<uint8_t> StrSlice;

    /* A trait object is composed of a data pointer and a vtable */
    struct TraitObject {
        void* data;
        void* vtable;
    };

    /* A dummy struct which is generated when incompatible types are closed-over */
    struct __Dummy;


    /* Typedefs for integral and floating point types */
    typedef uint8_t u8;
    typedef uint16_t u16;
    typedef uint32_t u32;
    typedef uint64_t u64;
    typedef uint64_t usize;

    typedef int8_t i8;
    typedef int16_t i16;
    typedef int32_t i32;
    typedef int64_t i64;
    typedef int64_t isize;

    typedef float f32;
    static_assert(sizeof(f32) == 4, "C++ `float` isn't 32 bits wide");

    typedef double f64;
    static_assert(sizeof(f64) == 8, "C++ `double` isn't 64 bits wide");

    /* We use this bool type to ensure that our bools are 1 byte wide */
    typedef i8 bool_;
}

/* User-generated function declarations */
extern "C" {

::rs::i32 rust_cpp_936DA01F9ABD4d9d80C702AF85C822A8(const ::rs::i32& a, const ::rs::i32& b) {
    int32_t c = a * 10;
    int32_t d = b * 20;

    return c + d;
}

}
```

The code would then use an
[ugly hack](https://github.com/mystor/rust-cpp/blob/legacy_rustc_plugin/src/lint.rs#L206-L221) to
insert the compiled static library into the `SearchPaths` object, causing it to
be linked in when the compiler performs the final link step.

This plugin was pretty cool. It could allow you to embed arbitrary C++ code into
your Rust code, was fairly easy to add, and inferred a lot of types for you to
boot! Unfortunately, it required unstable Rust, which meant that people
definitely couldn't use it, and also meant that I had to push a new version very
frequently to keep up with bustage.

Eventually, I decided to rewrite `rust-cpp`, and shed some of the cool features,
in persuit of it working on stable Rust, but that's a story for part 2.
